README.md, before:

[![noetic](../../actions/workflows/ros.yml/badge.svg)](../../actions/workflows/ros.yml)
[![docker-noetic-ros-base](../../actions/workflows/ros-base-docker.yml/badge.svg)](../../actions/workflows/ros-base-docker.yml)

# Project11: A mapping focused open-sourced software framework for Autonomous Surface Vehicles

The Project 11 framework was developed as a backseat driver for Autonomous Surface Vehicles
(ASVs). Key design features include the ability to quickly and easily specify survey plans; monitoring of mission progress, even
over unreliable wireless networks; and to provide an environment to develop advanced autonomous technologies.

## Installation

See the following for detailed instructions on setting up a Simulation Environment:

[Installing Project11's backseat driver system and simulator.lation Instructions](documentation/Installation.md)

### Quick Installation Guide

If you have an available ROS Noetic system, you can quickly install and run Project11 with the following:

    git clone --recursive https://github.com/CCOMJHC/project11.git

    sudo apt-get install python3-rosdep
    rosdep update
    rosdep install --from-paths project11/catkin_ws/src --ignore-src -r -y

    sudo apt install qtpositioning5-dev libqt5svg5-dev

    cd project11/catkin_ws
    catkin_make
    
    source devel/setup.bash
    roslaunch project11 sim_local.launch
    
## Major components and concepts

A typical setup has a ROS master running on the robot with some key nodes including the `mission_manager`, the `helm_manager` and the `udp_bridge`. The operator station runs a separate ROS master that also runs a `udp_bridge` node as well as `camp`, the CCOM Autonomous Mission Planner which provide a planning and monitoring interface.

### Operator user interface - CAMP

The [CCOM Autonomous Mission Planner](../../../CCOMAutonomousMissionPlanner), also known as CAMP, displays the vehicle's position on background georeferenced charts and maps. It also allows the planning of missions to be sent to the vehicle and to manage the vehicle's piloting mode.

### UDP Bridge - udp_bridge

The [UDP Bridge](../../../udp_bridge) sends select ROS topics between ROS masters. It allows control and monitoring over wireless unreliable networks.

### Mission Manager - mission_manager

The [Mission Manager](../../../mission_manager) receives missions from CAMP and executes them. It also handles requests such as hover.

### Helm Manager - helm_manager

The [Helm Manager](../../../helm_manager) controls which commands get sent to the underlying hardware. It reacts to changes in piloting mode by sending messages to the piloting mode enable topics and only allowing incoming control messages from the current piloting mode to be sent to the hardware interface.

### Piloting modes

Project11 operates in 3 major piloting modes: "manual", "autonomous" and "standby". 

In "manual" mode, the vehicle responds to commands sent from a device such as a joystick or a gamepad. The commands are converted to "helm" messages by the `joy_to_helm` node and are sent from the operator station to the vehicle via the `udp_bridge`.

In "autonomous" mode, the `mission_manager` sends mission items to the navigation stack and responds to override commands such as the hover command that can allow the vehicle to station keep for a while, then resume the mission when the hover is canceled.

The "standby" mode is used to when no control commands are to be sent by Project11.



### Navigation Stack

The `mission_manager` receives and executes the higher level missions. Depending on the task, track lines may be sent to the `path_follower` or another node will receive a higher level directive, such as "survey this area", and generate and send out track lines or other navigation segments to lower level planners or controllers.
Eventually, a "helm" or "cmd_velocity" message gets sent to the autonomous/helm or autonomous/cmd_vel topic reaching the `helm_manager`.

Commit message:

Add packages to all repos list

README.md, after:

[![docker-noetic-ros-base](../../actions/workflows/ros-base-docker.yml/badge.svg)](../../actions/workflows/ros-base-docker.yml)

# Project11: A mapping focused open-sourced software framework for Autonomous Surface Vehicles

The Project 11 framework was developed as a backseat driver for Autonomous Surface Vehicles
(ASVs). Key design features include the ability to quickly and easily specify survey plans; monitoring of mission progress, even
over unreliable wireless networks; and to provide an environment to develop advanced autonomous technologies.

## Installation

See the following for detailed instructions on setting up a Simulation Environment:

[Installing Project11's backseat driver system and simulator.](documentation/Installation.md)

### Quick Installation Guide

If you have an available ROS Noetic system, you can quickly install and run Project11 with the following:

    mkdir -p project11/catkin_ws/src
    cd project11/catkin_ws/src
    git clone https://github.com/rolker/project11.git

    sudo apt-get install python3-rosdep python3-vcstool
    rosdep update

    vcs import < project11/config/repos/sim_demo.repos
    
    rosdep install --from-paths . --ignore-src -r -y

    sudo apt install qtpositioning5-dev libqt5svg5-dev

    cd project11/catkin_ws
    catkin_make
    
    source devel/setup.bash
    roslaunch project11 sim_local.launch
    
## Major components and concepts

A typical setup has a ROS master running on the robot with some key nodes including the `mission_manager`, the `helm_manager` and the `udp_bridge`. The operator station runs a separate ROS master that also runs a `udp_bridge` node as well as `camp`, the CCOM Autonomous Mission Planner which provide a planning and monitoring interface.

### Operator user interface - CAMP

The [CCOM Autonomous Mission Planner](../../../camp), also known as CAMP, displays the vehicle's position on background georeferenced charts and maps. It also allows the planning of missions to be sent to the vehicle and to manage the vehicle's piloting mode.

### UDP Bridge - udp_bridge

The [UDP Bridge](../../../udp_bridge) sends select ROS topics between ROS masters. It allows control and monitoring over wireless unreliable networks.

### Mission Manager - mission_manager

The [Mission Manager](../../../mission_manager) receives missions from CAMP and executes them. It also handles requests such as hover.

### Helm Manager - helm_manager

The [Helm Manager](../../../helm_manager) controls which commands get sent to the underlying hardware. It reacts to changes in piloting mode by sending messages to the piloting mode enable topics and only allowing incoming control messages from the current piloting mode to be sent to the hardware interface.

### Piloting modes

Project11 operates in 3 major piloting modes: "manual", "autonomous" and "standby". 

In "manual" mode, the vehicle responds to commands sent from a device such as a joystick or a gamepad. The commands are converted to "helm" messages by the `joy_to_helm` node and are sent from the operator station to the vehicle via the `udp_bridge`.

In "autonomous" mode, the `mission_manager` sends mission items to the navigation stack and responds to override commands such as the hover command that can allow the vehicle to station keep for a while, then resume the mission when the hover is canceled.

The "standby" mode is used to when no control commands are to be sent by Project11.



### Navigation Stack

The `mission_manager` receives and executes the higher level missions. Depending on the task, track lines may be sent to the `path_follower` or another node will receive a higher level directive, such as "survey this area", and generate and send out track lines or other navigation segments to lower level planners or controllers.
Eventually, a "helm" or "cmd_velocity" message gets sent to the autonomous/helm or autonomous/cmd_vel topic reaching the `helm_manager`.
